Hydrox is the brand name for a creme-filled chocolate sandwich cookie that debuted in 1908 and was manufactured by Sunshine (later Sunshine Biscuits). The similar Oreo cookie—introduced later, in 1912—was inspired by the Hydrox, yet Hydrox suffered from the impression of being the knockoff. Compared to Oreos, Hydrox cookies have a tangy, less-sweet filling and a crunchier cookie that gets less soggy in milk.


== Name ==
Hydrox derived its name from the atoms comprising water. In 1908, the creators of the cookie were looking for a name that would convey "purity and goodness." Since water is known for those qualities, they developed the name from the elements making up a water molecule. Market research later determined that the name was not well received and was more evocative of cleaning solutions than cookies.


== Production ==
Sunshine Biscuits was purchased by Keebler in 1996, and in 1999, Keebler replaced Hydrox with a similar but reformulated product named Droxies. Keebler was later acquired by Kellogg's in 2001. Kellogg's removed Droxies from the market in 2003. Kellogg's now markets a chocolate sandwich cookie under the Famous Amos brand. Kellogg's says the Hydrox recipe is unique.
On the cookie's 100th anniversary, Kellogg's resumed distribution of Hydrox under the Sunshine label, with the first batches shipped in late August 2008. Hydrox aficionados had bombarded Kellogg's with thousands of phone calls and an on-line petition asking that production resume. The recipe was slightly altered from the original; trans-fats were removed. The cookies were to be available nationally for a limited time, and less than a year later Kellogg's had removed Hydrox from their web site.
The Carvel ice-cream franchise sold ice-cream goods manufactured with "Hydrox" cookie crumbs until 2012. Carvel used the cookies' all-kosher status as a selling point as the original Oreo recipe used lard. The cookies were not specifically mentioned by name on the Carvel website, but they were identified as hydrox (lower-case 'h') on the in-store posters. Carvel currently uses Oreo cookies in its ice cream goods.
In 2014, Leaf Brands, the company which brought back Astro Pops and Tart n Tinys, acquired the trademark to Hydrox Cookies. Leaf Brands plans on keeping the original flavor and familiar 'crunch' that consumers came to love about the Hydrox. The new Hydrox cookie will be available in most supermarket chains as well as in specialty stores. Leaf Brands plans on releasing Hydrox Cookie to the market the first quarter of 2015.


== See also ==

Cookie sandwich


== References ==


== External links ==
Hydrox Cookie fan page (2010)
CHRISTOPHER RHOADS: Hydrox Redux: Cookie Duels Oreo, Again - WSJ May 28, 2008